Script to relocate code/data/bss sections to different memory types. (#10892)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/code_data_relocation/relocation.rst

This script also trigger the generation of ``linker_relocate.ld`` and ``code_relocation.c`` files.
The ``linker_relocate.ld`` file creates appropriate sections and
link the required functions or variables from all the selected files.

**Note**:
On running this script text section is split into 2 parts. The first section
will have some info regarding vector tables and debug info.
The second section will have the complete text section.
This is needed to force the required functions and data variables the correct locations.
This is due to the behavior of the linker. The linker will only link once and
hence this text section had to be split to make room for the generated linker script.

The ``code_relocation.c`` file has code that is needed for
initializing data sections and a copy of text sections (if XIP).
Also this contains code needed for bss zeroing and
for  data copy operations from ROM to required memory type.

**The procedure to invoke this feature is:**

* Enable :option:`CONFIG_CODE_DATA_RELOCATION` in the ``prj.conf`` file
* Inside the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file, add the following line immediately
  after cmake_minimum_required()
  Note: This is needed only once.

>   ``include($ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE}/cmake/section_relocation.cmake NO_POLICY_SCOPE)``

Reviewer: Requiring that the user does this is not aligned with how Zephyr works.

This is how we can fix this:

Move "function(zephyr_code_relocate file location)" into boilerplate.cmake.

Modify 'zephyr_code_relocate' to work on a custom target's
COMPILE_DEFINITION property instead of the global property
'CODE_DATA_RELOCATION_STRINGS'. See how the COMPILE_DEFINITION
property of 'memory_space_kernel'[0] is used for reference. They
are solving the same problem.  [0]
https://github.com/zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr/pull/8451/files#diff-af3b638bc2a3e6c650974192a53c7291R592

Don't de-reference 'CODE_DATA_RELOCATION_STRINGS' with
'get_property' in zephyr/CMakeLists.txt. But instead use a
generator expression to defer evaluation until generation
time. See [0] for how to do this.

Update the documentation accordingly.

Reviewer 2: @SebastianBoe Done. Please re-review.

> .. _code_data_relocation:

Reviewer 3: As noted elsewhere, this document should go into the developer guide area, so move this from ``doc/code_data_relocation/relocation.rst`` to ``doc/application/relocation.rst`` and edit the ``doc/application/index.rst`` to include ``relocation.rst`` into the toc there.

CODE DATA RELOCATION
####################

Overview
********

> This script will relocate .text, .rodata, .data and .bss sections from

Reviewer 2: @dbkinder I don't understand why there needs to a comma before an "and" in this case. Hence I haven't fixed this.
Others are done. Please re-review.

> This script will relocate .text, .rodata, .data and .bss sections from

Reviewer 3: With so many contributors, we've tried to standardize on some simple editorial guidelines such as using English spellings (vs. British) and using the [Microsoft Writing Style Guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/welcome/), and [Merriam-Webster Dictionary](http://www.merriam-webster.com/) as guidelines.  Use of the Oxford (or serial) comma is the recommendation, to avoid potential confusion with lists.

> This script will relocate .text, .rodata, .data and .bss sections from

Reviewer 2: ohh okay. Changed to the recommendation.
@dbkinder Please re-review.

required files and places it in the required memory region. This
memory region and file are given to this python script in the form
of a string. This script is always invoked from inside cmake.

This script provides a robust way to re-order
the memory contents without actually having to modify the code.
In simple terms this script will do the job of
``__attribute__((section("name")))`` for a bunch of files together.

Details
*******
The memory region and file are given to this python script in the form of a string.

> Example of such a string would be:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example of such a string is:
```

``SRAM2:/home/xyz/zephyr/samples/hello_world/src/main.c,SRAM1:/home/xyz/zephyr/samples/hello_world/src/main2.c``

> This script is invoked with following parameters:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This script is invoked with the following parameters:
```

``python3 gen_relocate_app.py -i input_string -o generated_linker -c generated_code``

Kconfig :option:`CONFIG_CODE_DATA_RELOCATION` option,  when enabled in ``prj.conf``, will
invoke the script and do the required relocation.

This script also trigger the generation of ``linker_relocate.ld`` and ``code_relocation.c`` files.
The ``linker_relocate.ld`` file creates appropriate sections and

> link the required functions or variables from all the selected files.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
links the required functions or variables from all the selected files.
```

> **Note**:

Reviewer 3: This would present better as:
```
.. note:: After running this script, the text section is split into 2 parts.
   The first section will have some info regarding vector tables and debug info.
   The second section will have the complete text section.
   This is needed to force the required functions and data variables to the correct locations.
   This is due to the behavior of the linker. The linker will only link once and
   hence this text section had to be split to make room for the generated linker script.
```

On running this script text section is split into 2 parts. The first section
will have some info regarding vector tables and debug info.
The second section will have the complete text section.
This is needed to force the required functions and data variables the correct locations.
This is due to the behavior of the linker. The linker will only link once and
hence this text section had to be split to make room for the generated linker script.

The ``code_relocation.c`` file has code that is needed for

> initializing data sections and a copy of text sections (if XIP).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
initializing data sections, and a copy of the text sections (if XIP).
```

Also this contains code needed for bss zeroing and
for  data copy operations from ROM to required memory type.

**The procedure to invoke this feature is:**

* Enable :option:`CONFIG_CODE_DATA_RELOCATION` in the ``prj.conf`` file

> * Inside the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file in the project. we need to mention

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Inside the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file in the project, mention
```

>   all the files that needs to get relocated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  all the files that need relocation.
```

  ``zephyr_code_relocate(src/*.c SRAM2)``

  Where the first argument is the file/files and the second
  argument is the memory where it must be placed.

 .. note::
    The file argument supports limited regular expressions.
    function zephyr_code_relocate() can be called  as many times as required.
    This step has to be performed before the inclusion of boilerplate.cmake.

Additional Configurations
=========================
This section shows additional configuration options that can be set in ``CMakeLists.txt``

* if the memory is SRAM1, SRAM2, CCD, or AON, then place the full object in the sections
  for example:

> .. code-block:: none

Reviewer 3: This code block (and contents) should be indented by two spaces to be treated as part of the bullet list item.

   zephyr_code_relocate(src/file1.c SRAM2)
   zephyr_code_relocate(src/file2.c.c SRAM)

* if the memory type is appended with _DATA, _TEXT, _RODATA or _BSS, only the
  selected memory is placed in the required memory region.
  for example:

> .. code-block:: none

Reviewer 3: same here, indent the code-block directive (and contents) by two more spaces

   zephyr_code_relocate(src/file1.c SRAM2_DATA)
   zephyr_code_relocate(src/file2.c.c SRAM2_TEXT)

* Multiple regions can also be appended together such as: SRAM2_DATA_BSS.
  This will place data and bss inside SRAM2.

Sample
======
A sample showcasing this feature is provided at
``$ZEPHYR_BASE/samples/test_relocation/``

This is an example of using the code relocation feature.

> This example will place .text, .data, .bss from 3 files to various parts in the SRAM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example will place .text, .data, .bss from 3 files to various parts in the SRAM
```

Example of such a string would be:
``SRAM2:/home/xyz/zephyr/samples/hello_world/src/main.c,SRAM1:/home/xyz/zephyr/samples/hello_world/src/main2.c``

This script is invoked with following parameters:
``python3 gen_relocate_app.py -i input_string -o generated_linker -c generated_code``

Kconfig ``CODE_DATA_RELOCATION`` when enabled in ``prj.conf`` will
invoke the script, which does the required relocation.

This script also trigger the generation of linker_relocate.ld and code_relocation.c files.
The ``linker_relocate.ld`` will create appropriate sections and will
link the required functions or variables from all the selected files.

**Note**:
On running this script text section is split into 2 parts. The first section
will have some info regarding vector tables and debug info.
The second section will have the complete text section.
This is needed to force the required functions and data variables the correct locations.
This is due to the behavior of the linker. The linker will only link once and
hence this text section had to be split to make room for the generated linker script.

The ``code_relocation.c`` will have code that is needed for

> initializing data sections and copy of text sections(if XIP).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
initializing data sections and a copy of text sections (if XIP).
```

> Also this will contain code that is needed for bss zeroing and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also this contains code needed for bss zeroing and
```

for  data copy operations from ROM to required memory type.

**The procedure to invoke this feature is:**

> * Enable CONFIG_CODE_RELOCATION in the ``prj.conf``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Enable :option:`CONFIG_CODE_RELOCATION` in the ``prj.conf`` file
```

> * Inside the ``CMakeLists.txt`` the following needs to be added immediately

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Inside the ``CMakeLists.txt`` file, add the following line immediately
```

  after cmake_minimum_required()
  Note: This is needed only once.

  ``include($ENV{ZEPHYR_BASE}/cmake/section_relocation.cmake NO_POLICY_SCOPE)``

* Before the inclusion of boilerplate.cmake we need to mention
  all the files that need to get relocated.

  ``zephyr_code_relocate(src/*.c SRAM2)``

>   Where the first argument is the file/files and the second

Reviewer 3: add a blank line before this to start a new paragraph

>   argument is the memory where it has be placed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  argument is the memory where it must be placed.
```

>   Note: The file argument supports limited regular expressions.

Reviewer 3: use a note directive (indented the same as the body text of the bullet list):
```
  .. note::  The file argument supports limited regular expressions.
     Function ``zephyr_code_relocate()`` can be called as many times as required.
     This step has to be performed before the inclusion of boilerplate.cmake.
```

  function zephyr_code_relocate() can be called  as many times as required.
  This step has to be performed before the inclusion of boilerplate.cmake.

> Additional Configuration's:-

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional Configurations
```

============================

> This section shows few Configuration options that can be set in ``CMakeLists.txt``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section shows additional configuration options that can be set in ``CMakeLists.txt``
```

> * if the memory is like SRAM1/SRAM2/CCD/AON then place full object in the sections

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* if the memory is SRAM1, SRAM2, CCD, or AON, then place the full object in the sections
  for example:
```

.. code-block:: none

>    e.g: zephyr_code_relocate(src/file1.c SRAM2)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   zephyr_code_relocate(src/file1.c SRAM2)
```

>         zephyr_code_relocate(src/file2.c.c SRAM)

Reviewer 3: indent this line the same as the previous one

> * if the memory type is appended with _DATA / _TEXT/ _BSS only the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* if the memory type is appended with _DATA, _TEXT, or _BSS, only the
```

>   selected memory is placed in the required memory region. Others are ignored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  selected memory is placed in the required memory region.
  Others are ignored.  For example:
```

.. code-block:: none

>    e.g: zephyr_code_relocate(src/file1.c SRAM2_DATA)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  zephyr_code_relocate(src/file1.c SRAM2_DATA)
```

>         zephyr_code_relocate(src/file2.c.c SRAM2_TEXT)

Reviewer 3: indent the same as the previous line

> * Multiple regions can also be appended together like SRAM2_DATA_BSS

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Multiple regions can also be appended together such as: SRAM2_DATA_BSS.
```

>   this will place data and bss inside SRAM2

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This will place data and bss inside SRAM2.
```

> Sample:-

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sample
```

========

> An sample showcasing this feature is provided at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A sample showcasing this feature is provided at
```

``$ZEPHYR_BASE/samples/test_relocation/``

> Above sample provides an example for using the code relocation feature.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is an example of using the code relocation feature.
```

> This example will place text,data,bss from 3 files to various parts in the SRAM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example will place text, data, and bss from 3 files to various parts in SRAM
using a custom linker file derived from ``include/arch/arm/cortex_m/scripts/linker.ld``.
```

> For this a custom linker file is used

Reviewer 3: ... and delete these two lines
